# SPASOS
SPASOS: Software for the Phylogenetic Analysos of Shape OntogenieS
PASOS (Phylogenetic Analysis of Shape OntogenieS) is a method to infer ancestral shape ontogenies and changes in developmental timing along a phylogeny departing from shapes described as landmark configurations. The approach is rooted in previous developments for the analysis of landmark data in a phylogenetic context with parsimony as optimality criterion (Catalano et al., 2010, Goloboff & Catalano 2011; Catalano & Goloboff 2012). The ontogenetic trajectory is delimited by starting and end points common to all species under analysis (double stage standardization Alba, 2002). The method allows analyzing ontogenetic trajectories with shapes recorded at different moments of the trajectories with age defined as either a prior defined stages or continuous time. This method is implemented in SPASOS (Software for Phylogenetic Analysis of Shape OntogenieS), a windows command line program written in C language and open source. The program reads the data from a tps file including all the specimens under analysis. The reference tree should be given in parenthetical notation in a different file. While the inference of changes in developmental timing is performed in SPASOS, the optimization of landmark data on the tree is performed in TNT (SPASOS launches TNT). The program produced a series of output files that allow different a posteriori processing and visualization of the results.
NOTE: it is imperative to read the paper describing the method (Catalano et al. 2018) before running the analyses
